[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>People's beliefs are
challenged every day
about our human existence
within the physical world.
We can live in fear and
be locked into beliefs
that make us feel safe.
Or we can become
curious and begin
to question all that we
have learned up until now.
Because of the
scientists, explorers,
and pioneers of
consciousness, we
are beginning to
believe that we are
more than our physical body.
Now is the time
to stop believing
and start experiencing what
is beyond the physical.
>>Think about radio waves
or television waves.
We can sit here, and I could
tune into a radio station,
and maybe it's a new station.
There's some guy, somewhere,
who is broadcasting news.
I can change the dial, and it'll
be a country music station.
There somebody somewhere
who's playing country music.
I can change it again,
and I can get pop music.
I don't see those
other dimensions,
but when I tune into them,
when I direct my perception,
then those worlds become real.
They come to life.
Where are they?
They're everywhere.
They're being
broadcast everywhere.
So for me, it's not very much
of a stretch of imagination
to think that it isn't
limited to radio and TV,
that there are other worlds that
are happening simultaneously
right here.
So then it becomes a question
of, how do we tune into them?
How do we shift
our perception so
that we can begin to interact
with them in a meaningful way?
[STATIC]
>>So there's a big,
complex world out there
in the world of consciousness.
Because the consciousness system
didn't just put all its eggs
in this one basket.
There's other virtual realities,
and they're all different.
They have different rules.
They're not all
the same rule sets.
When you take this as
a premise, then you
can explain a lot of things
that are now unexplainable.
>>If you'll look hard enough,
you will find out something.
You will find out that you are
more than your physical body.
Now many people find this out
through a healing experience.
Many people find this
out through connection
with guidance, through an
out-of-body experience,
through a psychokinetic
experience,
or through a remote
viewing experience.
>>97% percent of
humanity believes
in the concept of a soul.
But yet for some
reason, the idea
of experiencing what we truly
are seems alien to people.
There's a disconnect in our
society that's big time,
and it's unfortunate based on
my experience from thousands
of out-of-body experiences
over the last 35 years.
I realize that it's a
multi-dimensional universe,
and that this physical world
is just the epidermis layer.
We all have the ability
to actually move
beyond our dense
exterior, our facade,
and start to explore
these other dimensions.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>It is only once you move
beyond the physical body
that you lose the fear of death.
Robert Monroe was a pioneer
in this type of exploration.
He was a successful
business executive
and noted pioneer
in the investigation
of human consciousness.
In 1958, Monroe coined the
term "out-of-body experience"
as he began experiencing a
state of consciousness separate
and apart from
his physical body.
>>Most people would recognize
as a classic out-of-body
experience is when
you believe yourself
to be separate from the
body, and that belief
is reinforced very strongly
because you look back
and see your body.
Now this happens in near death
experiences, in surgery cases,
or in automobile
cases where people
have a very definite
experience of saying,
"I am separate from my
body because look there's
my body right down there."
That was the kind of classic
out-of-body experience
that Bob Monroe first had.
One night he felt himself
bouncing or hitting
something hard and
flat, and he thought
it might be the sheets of his
bed or the covers of his bed.
And it turned out to
be the ceiling itself,
because it was
rough and textured.
And he thought that there
was a fountain next to him,
and he couldn't
figure out why there
was a fountain in his bed.
It turned out to be
the chandelier hanging
over the bed.
And when he looked down, there
was this strange man in bed
with his wife, and
couldn't figure out
what was going on until
he realized that was him
down there in the bed.
And he was quite panicked
about-- this is dying.
I'm dying now.
So he tried very hard and he
pulled himself through the air,
swimming through the air.
And finally fit himself like
a glove back into his body
and sat up in bed quite startled
and panicked and worried
about this whole thing.
>>So in the beginning,
he was quite convinced
that he was dying.
And he went through
numerous medical tests
and even psychological tests
to see if he was crazy or not.
And all the tests proved that he
was in relatively good health,
and he was pretty sane.
Now you have to
remember, in the 1950s,
this was a time when
nobody was talking
about that kind of experience.
There was no such thing
as the new age movement.
It wasn't part of
our vocabulary.
And so he was in the unfortunate
position, or maybe fortunate
for us, of really having
to go it alone and find out
for himself what
this was all about.
>>During this period
of time, he was
part of the social
world of New York.
He was a young man, college
graduate, looking for a job,
and found himself in New
York in the radio industry.
>>In fact, he was a producer
of a very famous radio
program called "The Shadow."
Many people from my
generation and before
remember that very
well because it was
a nationally broadcast series.
There were things
happening in his life
that he simply
didn't understand,
and that he needed to
find some way of bringing
some kind of better awareness
to what was going on.
>>After visiting doctors, going
to different religious leaders,
trying to understand
what had happened to him,
they talked about an Eastern
tradition of going out of body.
And Bob Monroe, if you really
want to know more about this,
you should go to the Far
East and talk to the masters,
because they seem to know
something about this.
Well, he didn't want to do that.
He was a businessman
in New York, the vice
president of NBC Radio.
He couldn't do that.
>>Once he began to get some
assurances that perhaps
his wellbeing was
not in jeopardy,
he started to get
really curious about it.
The fear started to drop
away and curiosity kicked in.
>>He began to experiment.
Practicing in bed at night, he
would feel a sense of vibration
or a sense of becoming
puffy, larger,
and then reducing to size.
And then this vibration
would cease at some point.
And he found that via what
he called a second body,
he would reach over
and try reaching down
through the floor, and
then he would reach up
through the ceiling.
And eventually, got brave
enough to walk outside and then
come back in to make sure
he could still come back.
And eventually, would
go to his neighbors,
and then come back real quick.
And after time, he
began to venture further
and found that this whole
local world that we know it
is really pretty
boring in comparison
to all the places
in the universe
that he could discover
in this state.
>>As Monroe was exploring
these other dimensions
in the universe, he began
to journal his experiences.
Several years after
he started journaling,
Bob Monroe had fallen
ill and needed surgery
on his carotid arteries,
which at the time
was considered a
very risky procedure.
In order to keep his
journaling preserved,
he gave his manuscript
to a good friend of his
in an effort to make sure
his journaling was kept safe.
>>Well, he came out of
surgery and he recovered,
and weeks and months rolled by.
And got in contact with
his friend and said,
well, I'd like to get
my transcript back.
I seem to be healed up now, and
I'd like to continue my work.
And he said, well, Mr. Monroe,
this is such a fantastic work,
I've given it to a
publisher to look at,
and they'd like to
publish a book on this.
Well, Bob was torn.
Here he was, part of New York
society, being very proper
and doing all the right
things to work his way up
through New York society,
sort of worried about,
well, I don't want
this to get out.
This is my secret life.
This is something
else I'm doing.
On the other hand,
there was like, a book?
Somebody wants to
publish a book?
Well, that'd be kind of nice
if somebody published a book.
And maybe if they published
a book, others would read it,
and they could help me find
out, what's this all about?
What's this grand
adventure I'm on?
Maybe others have
had this adventure,
and maybe a book would
be a good way to do that.
And then the other part
would come back and say,
I don't know.
I might lose my job if
they found out about this.
>>In 1971, Robert Monroe's
journaled accounts
were published in
his first book called
"Journeys Out Of The Body."
It was the first
book of its kind
and brought a subject that
wasn't being talked about much
into the mainstream,
allowing others
to come forth to share
their paranormal stories
and out-of-body experiences.
>>I remember him telling
me one time very vividly
about he had been invited to
a cocktail party with his boss
and so forth and so on.
And they were standing
around in a high rise
apartment in New York, all
with their cocktail glasses.
And his boss said, hey
Bob, come over here.
I want to ask you about
that book you wrote.
And he thought, oh, no.
This is the end.
NBC's going to fire me.
It's going to be
all over for me.
And his boss said, my wife
has this happen to her
all the time, and she thinks
this is just the greatest
book she's ever read.
Wanted to thank you for that.
And so he was like,
that was the first time
at which he had a sense of
relief that, this is OK.
It's really OK.
I'm not going to be
ostracized or I'm not
going to be locked up as being
crazy, that this is really OK.
>>Throughout the next
20 years, Robert Monroe
continued to explore,
research, and teach others
about expanded states
of human consciousness
and practical methods of
enhancing human potential.
He later wrote two more
books titled "Far Journeys"
and "Ultimate Journey,"
which expanded
upon his investigations
and research
of nonphysical realities
and the limits of what
lies beyond the physical world.
>>When Bob left
the New York scene,
he first moved to
Richmond, Virginia
and spent some time
in Richmond doing
different kinds of
businesses, trying
to find an interesting
business to do now
that he had made his
millions in New York
and moved to a quieter
lifestyle in Richmond.
Then he met and
married his wife Nancy,
and they moved out to the
Virginia countryside into place
called Whistlefield Farms, which
is about 10 miles from where
we are right now.
He sought the help of
people from the University
of Virginia.
He sought the help of
friends and associates
that he met or would
be referred to them.
One was a very
interesting physicist
by the name of Tom Campbell.
>>Tom is the TC
physicist described in
Bob Monroe's second
book, "Far Journeys"
and has been a serious explorer
of the frontiers of reality,
mind, consciousness,
and psychic phenomena
since the early 1970s.
>>I took a job, and my boss
tossed Bob Monroe's book,
"Journeys Out Of The Body."
And because I was
a physicist, he
wanted to know--
physicists study reality.
He wanted to know what
I thought about it.
And I thought, wow,
that's very interesting,
but how do you know it's true?
Maybe this guy's just making
this stuff up to sell books.
About a month or so later
the boss comes back and says,
we know where Bob lives.
He lives not far away.
We're going to go visit him.
Would you like to come?
Of course I did.
Found Bob to be a
very credible person.
You can generally tell
when people trying to make
impressions or put
something over on you,
and he was just very open.
Very affable, kind of nice guy.
He was wealthy in his own
right, so he wasn't trying
to make money on his books.
He made 100 times what
those books made in his job.
So that wasn't
obviously his point.
And the more I talked
with him, the more
I realized that what
Bob really wanted more
than anything was
to make himself,
his experience legitimate.
He wanted to understand it.
He wanted to turn
out-of-body into science,
something repeatable.
That was a dream of his.
So he had built this lab.
And the lab was empty.
It was just basically
an empty building.
And he was looking for
some scientific talent,
some credentials to help
put the lab together.
So he asked the group of us--
where I worked at the time
was full of engineers
and scientists.
And he kind of asked us.
He said, well, you guys are
all scientists and engineers.
I'm building this lab.
Any of you want to
work there, want
to help me put it together?
Boy, my hand shot up
in the air instantly,
and another guy's did as well.
>>That other person
was Dennis Mennerich.
With a background in
electrical engineering,
Dennis would be a
perfect contrast
to Tom's knowledge of physics.
Together they began
building Bob Monroe's lab.
As construction progressed,
Bob would teach Tom and Dennis
his techniques of
going out-of-body.
>>The deal we made
with Bob was that we
would help him put
his lab together,
and we would make
sure that things
were done according
to good protocols,
that the results
would be believable.
And we would help him build his
equipment, his things he needed
to measure what was going on.
And that he would help us
learn what he knew how to do.
He would help us
learn the out-of-body,
how to master altered states
and that sort of thing.
And he agreed.
So for the next five
to maybe eight years--
this was probably about
1972-- up to about 1980,
we'd go out to the
lab, we'd spend an hour
or two building equipment,
wiring things, soldering,
making GSRs to measure
galvanic skin response.
We got an old EEG
for brain waves.
We did some high impedance
input volt meters
for changing the voltage on
the skin and around the head.
Just anything we could
think of to measure.
We really didn't know what
might be useful to measure.
So we just measured
everything that we could.
And then afterwards
Bob would come up,
and Dennis Mennerich and
I would get in the booths.
And he would teach
us, at least try
to guide us to having those
experiences and altered states.
And at this time, he
had some background
sounds that he played, but they
were mostly just pink noise.
And the pink noise was
supposed to just help
kind of settle your mind
and let you not think
about anything in particular.
>>Bob Monroe had suspicions
that this pink noise,
if enhanced somehow,
could possibly
help others go out of body.
Bob looked through the past
experiences in his life
for the key element
that possibly
caused his out-of-body
experiences to come so easily.
>>And he talks about
being in DC-3 aircraft,
a very old and yet very
reliable aircraft, which
had two propellers.
And the pilots were
trained very carefully
to adjust the pitch
of the propellers
and the RPMs of the
engine correctly.
Else, if they were slightly
out of tune with one another,
the pilots would
be exposed to a--
[WHIRRING]
--sound as the two engines
had this beat frequency
oscillation.
And they had had accidents
with the pilots falling asleep.
And so they said,
you must make sure,
do not let that sound
come through your engines.
Adjust the RPMs and
the pitch of the props
so that that doesn't happen.
So he remembered that
as a sound concept
in its ability to help
people to go to sleep.
And then he remembers riding
on the train from Westchester
County into the city to his
job, where he would watch people
nod off in the morning
to sleep and noticed
that the sound of
the train-- chu
chu chu chu, chu chu
chu chu, chu chu chu
chu-- to go across the tracks
seemed to rhythmically cause
people to go to sleep.
>>I don't think that you
could go to Bob Monroe's house
and have a normal cocktail hour.
Because as soon as
you would get there,
within a few minutes instead of
a beer or something like that,
he'd lead you into a room
and slap a pair of headphones
on your head, and turn
the light on and start
fiddling with dials and knobs
to see what effect sound might
have on your awareness,
and what your reactions
might be to that.
So through countless
hours of experimentation,
he began to realize
that sound could
be used to start to
aid and to direct
these kinds of experiences.
>>Well, this was a popular
time in which sleep
learning was an en
vogue kind of thing.
It was one of those-- today
if we saw it on television
it would be $19.95!
Learn while you sleep! $19.95!
And it's a truly
American way to try
to get something for nothing.
If I don't have
to study and work
at it-- if I could learn while
I slept, that'd be a good idea.
So there were a lot
of products out there
on the old 33 RPM records that
had your mathematic tables on
in foreign language,
lessons on them,
different dialogues with
promises that all you had to do
is play this 33 RPM
record, and you could
learn while you were sleeping.
And after a few
years, scientists
began to look at this.
Is this true?
All of these salesmen are out
there marketing these things
to the naive public.
Is this true?
Can you really learn
while you're asleep?
And the scientists found out
that in stages of sleep-- stage
one, stage two, stage
three, stage four,
and REM-- that if you are in
stage one, stage two, this very
light stage of sleep, that you
could actually test someone
the next morning, and
the multiplication tables
were remembered.
Their vocabulary
skills were improved.
But if the person was allowed to
go down to stage three or stage
four sleep, it didn't work.
So there was a little
bit of something
to this concept
of sleep learning,
but only if you could
maintain this platform
of the early hypnagogic
stages of sleep,
not down here in the
unconscious stages of sleep.
So Bob Monroe said,
oh, maybe that
would be a good thing to do.
Maybe we could allow people to
get into this balanced stage
where the mind is awake,
but the body is asleep.
And then it began to
develop that, you know,
this has something to do maybe
with what happened to me.
Here I was developing
all these sounds,
listening very carefully,
exposing myself
to all these sounds.
I wonder if it carried
over into that night
when I was in the bedroom when
I was floating out of my body.
And so he began to
think that maybe it
was the sound
experiments he'd done.
So he started creating sounds.
Started creating different
sound patterns to experiment
with this mind
awake, body asleep.
>>Through Tom, Dennis, and
Bob's experimentation in the lab
measuring the different EEG
brain waves and patterns,
they found that by placing
different sounds into each ear,
they discovered that
four hertz seemed
to be the right frequency
to elicit this altered state
and out-of-body experience.
Bob had left the lab for a
few weeks, and in his absence,
Tom and Dennis worked
with EEGs in order
to recreate this four
hertz oscillation.
They were trying to test
the four hertz theory.
>>We knew that Bob felt this
four hertz oscillation just
before he went
out of body, so we
were trying to see if we
couldn't emulate that.
Dennis and I worked at
it, and Dennis actually
is the one that came up
with the Hemi-Sync idea.
He read it in a "Scientific
American" article.
He said, let's try this, see
if it doesn't entrain the brain
waves.
We wanted a way to entrain
it down to the four hertz.
We thought if this
EEG was oscillating,
if you could put almost all your
energy into that four hertz,
that that might be something
that would be a good idea
to do.
It was just our intuition.
We really didn't know either.
And EEG is generally scattered
over lots of frequency bands.
It goes, delta's unconscious.
Theta's like the
meditation state.
Alpha's kind of a
calm, relaxed state.
Then you get the beta,
which is where we are now,
having a conversation.
You have all this energy.
When you look at your
brain waves in an EEG,
they have the little
electrodes that
are attached all over your
head, they measure this.
And right now, we would
have about 80% of our energy
would be in the beta state.
Some would be the alpha, and
some would be in the theta.
Probably none would
be in the delta,
or very little would be there.
So we found that this
Hemi-Sync, that what it is-- it
wasn't called Hemi-Sync then.
That was Bob's name.
It was just binaural beats.
And that puts a pure
tone in the left ear.
Pure tone-- that's
about four hertz off
from the first tone
in the right ear.
And the two tones go
in and actually mix
at the corpus callosum, which
is that part of the brain that
separates the two hemispheres.
It's where the
cross connects are.
>>Now what happens is when
those two signals are introduced
to each ear, there's
a third signal
that's produced that is the
difference between them.
100 and 104.
The difference between them
is four cycles per second.
At four cycles per
second, then the brain
tends to want to
kind of mimic that.
Both of the halves of the
brain start to work together.
>>So in that part of the
brain, the one signal
is actually mixing
with the other signal
and causing these
oscillations at four hertz.
And it made the EEG, the power
under the curve in the four
hertz area, just
jump up tremendously.
So it succeeded,
and it also put us
in an altered state
that was just amazing.
Kind of the thing that
we were looking for.
>>When we're
beginning to explore
some of these ranges
of experience or ranges
of perception, the funny
thing is that the frequencies,
the brain wave frequencies
that we're looking at,
are below the
threshold of hearing.
So it's a bit
difficult if you want
to use an audio technology,
and you can't hear it.
So that's why Bob used
the binaural beats.
So if we're looking at four
cycles per second-- again,
the difference
between 100 and 104,
then we're starting to move
down into the delta range.
And even though that's not
something that we hear,
the brain actually
manufacturers that third signal.
In some ways it's like if
you've ever tuned a guitar.
You get to two strings
almost, very close.
But if they're
not quite in tune,
there will be sort of a wavering
or a vibrato of a slower
frequency.
Now that's a very
simplistic explanation
because in fact, our signals
have many, many layers to them.
And so you won't hear just one
frequency and just one beat.
Not only are they
layered, but they're also
masked so they're not going
to be distracting to you.
But they're still
very, very effective.
>>A few weeks later, Bob
Monroe came back to the lab,
and Tom and Dennis
showed him what
they were able to emulate with
the four hertz frequency called
binaural beats.
This later became
known as Hemi-Sync,
a product that launched
Monroe's lab and workshops.
>>So he began to develop
these tape programs.
And eventually said, you
know, if I could just
get 5,000 people, that
would be a good experiment.
5,000 people to try
this out and write down
reports about what
they experienced.
Then I'd know.
Let's make this a
grand experience.
We'll call it the M5000 program.
>>He sent out some
flyers then and said,
hey, we've got this
new technology,
and we'd like to experiment
with some people.
Anybody interested?
We had a lot of people
that were interested.
We wired a motel.
Bob was in the cable business,
so he got his cable truck out
there.
And we wired a motel, and
we got all this stuff going.
And it was a very
incredible weekend.
Lots and lots of people were
popped out of their bodies,
were doing things, going places.
And word got around.
And pretty soon, instead
of doing research,
we were trainers.
That just happens that way
because so many people wanted
to do it.
>>Well, it wasn't
but a couple of years
that we surpassed
that 5,000 number.
And now we do about 1,000 people
a year through the Institute
itself.
>>It got to where, like, every
weekend or every other weekend,
there was a line of people
that all wanted the experience.
That kind of started
to take over our lives.
So Dennis and I,
both after a bit,
after other people
were trained to do it
and other people could
do it, we backed out.
After that, Bob put me on
the board of directors,
and I would come
back occasionally
when they had meetings.
But basically, The Monroe
Institute and I kind of
went our own ways after that.
>>In Bob's curiosity,
in Bob's investigation
to find out what
happened to him,
created initially
this whole idea
that has grown decades
later into what we have now
as The Monroe Institute.
>>In 1995 at the age of 80,
and after decades of research,
Robert Monroe would make
his final transition
into the nonphysical.
>>Soon after Bob
died, he and I met.
You know, I went up to meet him.
He came once or
twice to meet me.
And we had a little
conversation.
It was very pleasant.
It was more of a goodbye
than anything else.
And then Bob went
off on his own way.
Every once in a while I still
kind of tap into that energy.
Because you can still tap
into that same energy,
and you can get his
opinion, if you'd like.
Because like I say, those
models are very accurate.
It really is his opinion.
It's the opinion he would
have had when he was here.
So I visit Bob in
that sense some.
And I occasionally will touch
the energy as it is now.
But Bob's moved on.
He's doing something else now.
We kind of got together for
a goodbye and congratulations
and a so long, sort of thing.
>>Bob's daughter, Laurie Monroe,
continued her father's research
into consciousness and
the mind's potential
until her death in 2006.
The Monroe Institute
was going to need
a new leader, a captain,
someone who could
steer the ship into the future.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Skip Atwater was immediately
appointed acting director
after Laurie's death and
would later become president.
Skip, who had started
in 1988 at The Institute
as the lab director,
recalls how he first
met Bob Monroe in
the late 1970s,
working for the US government
as a counterintelligence
specialist in the army.
His job was detecting and
preventing enemy spy activity.
>>And the idea is we would go
to different United States,
US military facilities' research
and development programs,
and pretend we were a
foreign intelligence service
and attack them, trying
to get as much information
as we could about them,
mimicking a threat
so that we could
show the commander,
this is what your picture
looks like to the enemy.
So it was a chance
for that commander
then to adjust his
security posture
based on the service we
were providing to him.
One very fateful day in
Redstone Arsenal Alabama
when we were
telling the commands
and staff about
this problem, they
asked us about remote viewing.
They actually pulled Puthoff and
Targ's book out of a briefcase
and put it on the
table and said,
what do we do to protect
ourselves from this?
>>Skip would soon be thrown
into a classified military
investigation.
At the time, the
United States military
was working with experts Russell
Targ and Dr. Harold Puthoff
off at the Stanford
Research Institute
on the phenomenon
of psychic spies.
>>Dr. Harold Puthoff
and Russell Targ
were studying at Stanford
Research Institute
a phenomena of people's ability
to describe locations that
were distant from them in space,
distant from them in time,
by mental means alone.
Now in esoteric terms, we
might call that clairvoyance,
but they tried to put a
different name on it that
sounded a little bit
more scientific, sounded
more acceptable
called remote viewing.
And when I read their
work, I was reading it
through the eyes of a
counterintelligence specialist
thinking, if this is true, if
what these scientists are doing
is true, then this is
something that I haven't
been doing for nine years.
I'm supposed to be a
specialist in figuring out
what enemy agents
might do, and this
isn't something I had been
thinking about at all.
That was a keynote
day in my life,
and was the beginning of
the next 10 years in my life
in becoming involved in a US
government counterintelligence
effort in remote viewing.
I came to discover that
this program that I thought
was a very interesting
program and was a threat,
and we really ought
to do something
about this, had been ongoing
for a number of years,
funded by classified sources
within the government.
So the work that Stanford
Research had published
were just a few
little studies not
revealing the
totality of the effort
that the government
had been involved
with for a number of years.
In the early experimentation
of remote viewing at Stanford
Research Institute,
they found not only
in trying to figure
out, how does this work,
they looked into
physics explanations.
Maybe it's really ultra
low frequency waves.
Well, if that's the
case, then the size
of the object remote
viewed and shielding
could be put into effect.
So they tried doing
very small things
inside thimble boxes,
then micro dots, and then
atomic structures.
And they found
size didn't matter.
Then they used submarines doing
remote viewing experiments
two miles down in the ocean.
Didn't matter.
Did not block this
low wave frequency.
So they dismissed an
electromagnetic explanation
for this.
Then they found
quite interestingly
in several experiments that
time didn't seem to matter.
The normal way to run a
remote viewing experiment back
in the early days
was like as children
we would play hide and seek.
One scientist would get a
randomly generated target
in a sealed envelope, go
out and get in their car,
and go to this place
that they didn't
know when they left in their
car where they were going.
They would open the envelope
and go to this place.
The person doing the remote
viewing, the perceiving,
would be locked in
a laboratory room
and simply told to describe
the location of this person
at 10 o'clock.
And the arrangements
were, you're
supposed to be at this
other place at 10 o'clock
and interact with the
target in some way.
If the target happened
to be a tower,
climb to the top of the top.
If the target happened
to be a restaurant,
order something to eat.
And collecting over hundreds
and hundreds of experiments,
there was this statistical
match between the descriptions
and where they actually
went that reinforced this.
Well, along came an
accident in science
in which the person was
on the way to the target.
It wasn't 10 o'clock yet.
And the person
doing the perceiving
said, I know where
they're going.
And they said, well, OK.
Describe where they're going.
And he drew perfectly the
location where they were.
And so then they were
saying, how could this be?
We know that it
doesn't depend on size
and it's not electromagnetic.
But if they haven't
even got there yet, how
is it that you could know that?
That was a guy named
Pat Price did that.
And Pat Price made
another time mistake
that led to the understanding
about time and distance
not mattering.
The target location
where the person went
was a public swimming pool
where kids were playing,
and there were two different
sized pools and so forth.
And yet, Pat Price
described this
as being an area of pools
of water, two water towers,
and it was a sewage
processing plant.
And so they said, well, look.
You did have pools of water,
and you were probably confused,
and that's why you called
this a sewage treatment plant.
And there was moving water,
but the towers you drew
weren't there.
You probably just imagined them.
Which by the nature of many
remote viewing transcripts,
there's wrong
information in there.
There's enough in there that
it statistically validates,
and then there's some things
like, I don't know why
you drew those towers in there.
It wasn't until 25 years
later when the city published
the historical records,
that location used
to be a water treatment plant.
So there's this question
of slippage in time then.
And over the years
now-- this has
been ongoing for
more than 30 years--
it seems that once you say, this
is a remote viewing situation,
this information was
produced by a remote viewer,
all of the concepts of
time and space or distance
just don't apply.
It just doesn't apply.
It's no more difficult
to describe something
with remote viewing
across the street,
10,000 miles away,
or on another planet.
It just doesn't matter.
So in 1977, I met Bob Monroe.
One of the methods
I investigated
was the Hemi-Sync technology
at The Monroe Institute.
Now at that time this was
all deeply classified,
not declassified until 1995.
So in 1977 when
I met Mr. Monroe,
I couldn't say to him,
gee, I train psychic spies
for the government.
How would your system work?
I could not say
those words to him.
But I did develop a
friendship and a rapport,
and he described his
technology, allowed me
to experience that technology.
And eventually we
wound up training
some of our remote viewers
in this Hemi-Sync process.
>>After a 35 year legacy
at The Monroe Institute,
Skip retired as the
Institute's president in 2012.
After the 2009 premiere of "The
Path: Afterlife" documentary,
The Monroe Institute
became interested
in the works of William Buhlman,
and now facilitates workshops
at The Institute.
With over 40 years of documented
out-of-body experiences,
William has become one
of America's top leading
experts in the OBE phenomenon.
>>Well, I was confirmed
agnostic for quite a long time,
up to 1972.
I had more or less rejected
all kinds of spiritual beliefs
and the whole concept
of a hereafter.
And when I was in college
back in 1972, a friend of mine
actually had a spontaneous
out-of-body experience.
And he told me about it,
and it changed his life.
It blew him away,
and he made me want
to pursue the entire topic
because I wanted to experience
what he experienced.
So I became extremely interested
in it, picked up a book,
and began to read
about the subject.
And I found that there were
actually methods available
where you could self-initiate
an out-of-body experience.
An out-of-body experience
is a broad term
just for any form
of consciousness,
any perception of
consciousness leaving the body.
And even though at the time
it sounded unbelievable
and wild I figured, why not?
I'll give it a shot.
If he had an experience,
I don't see why I can't.
So I decided to pursue
it and try this technique
for a period of a month.
It was an easy technique
where I would actually
visualize three objects in
my mother's home, things
that I had made.
And at the time, I was living
in a dorm-like structure
that was about five miles
from my mother's house.
And every night as
I went to sleep,
I just visualized myself
going to my mother's house
and touching these
three objects.
And I felt myself
there, and I tried
to hold that as my
last conscious thought
as I drifted off to sleep.
And for the first two
weeks, nothing much
happened except for
maybe a little increase
in dream recall.
And then on the end of the
third week, suddenly I awoke.
And I was startled to find
that I felt different.
And I was sleeping in a small
single bed next to the wall.
And when I reached
out my arm, my hand
actually entered the wall.
And that's when it hit
me, that oh my god.
This is real.
I did this.
And I thought about standing.
And the next thing I
knew, I was standing
by the foot of the bed.
But it was totally
real, totally conscious.
And I was just ecstatic.
I was, like, in shock.
And I began to focus and
look around the room.
And I realized that I could
see beyond the physical limits
of my small little dorm room.
And I noticed that there
was someone watching me.
And it was someone that had
a long robe and a beard,
and to be quite
frank, it scared me.
And the next thing I knew, snap.
I was back in my body.
And even though this
was a brief experience,
it totally changed my entire
perception of reality.
I mean, it changed
my entire life.
Because at that point I realized
that, yeah, this is for real.
This is not somebody's
hallucination.
This is heavy duty stuff.
I knew that I had
entered another reality,
another whole dimension.
And that night, I couldn't
sleep I was so excited.
I started writing down all
my, oh my god, other people
live in these other dimensions.
This is June of 1972 I became
obsessed with the topic.
I really started
pursuing it heavily then.
I started to explore
different methods
and began to have a lot
of different experiences.
>>For the next two
decades, William Buhlman
would travel and experience
other realities and dimensions
apart from his physical body.
He journaled these
experiences and compiled them
into his first book,
"Adventures Beyond the Body."
>>You know,
out-of-body experiences
have been documented and
written about for thousands
of years in all the holy
texts throughout history.
The Bible is full of references
to out-of-body experiences.
In 2 Corinthians,
Saint Paul talks about,
clearly I was, whether in
the body or out of the body,
I know not.
In another case, the
beginning of Revelations,
the fourth line
begins with, "I was
in the spirit on the Lord's
day, and I heard behind me
a great voice."
And then it goes on to describe
this amazing journey that's
obviously not in
the physical world.
And the entire chapter of
Revelations by many people
is viewed as an
out-of-body experience.
Another good one, probably
one of the best, surprisingly,
is in the Quran.
The core story of Islam is
Mohammed's night journey,
and how he leaves his body and
enters these other dimensions.
And he clearly states
it in the Quran.
He talks about entering seven
distinct dimensions of reality.
And during this journey, he
encounters different beings,
different angels on
each level of reality,
and they give him knowledge.
And it's actually
quite fascinating,
especially when you read
this in a non-cultural.
If you take away the cultural
overtones of this experience,
you begin to see this is clearly
a vivid, profound, out-of-body
experience that Mohammed
had, and that he interpreted.
And there's no other way in
my mind to interpret this.
He's actually flying on
this mystical animal,
moving and communicating
with angel Gabriel
and these other beings.
And that is the core element
of the entire religion
is based on this.
"The Tibetan Book of the Dead"
is another good reference
point.
The entire book has references
to experiences beyond the body.
It's actually a training manual.
When you strip away all
the very complicated,
let's just say mysticism
that many people feel
that's attached to it,
it's a training manual
to go beyond your
body and also to go
beyond form-based realities.
In "The Tibetan Book
of the Dead," they say,
go to the clear
light of the void.
It is repeated again
and again and again.
It's almost like a
mantra of the book.
It's amazing.
The monks will
surround someone who
is ready to make this
transition we call death,
and they chant
basically, oh, noble one.
Go to the clear
light of the void.
They're chanting
this in Tibetan.
Where in the West,
of course, we're
pumping people full of drugs
and often ignoring them.
It's all about keeping
them comfortable.
In Tibet and other
Buddhist areas,
they're actually trying
to make their transition
to a higher plane of reality.
They call it the bardo.
To go beyond the bardo, to
go beyond the astral plane,
to go beyond the
form-based heavens
and to go to the higher
realms of reality.
And this is the
entire training that I
try to, as much as possible,
to convey in my books.
I try to get people to go
beyond the astral plane
in their out-of-body
body experience.
Go to your higher self.
It's the same concept as
the Tibetan Buddhists.
I am a big journaler.
I believe in
documenting everything.
That's number one.
So I journaled
hundreds and hundreds
of my own out-of-body
experiences.
It finally dawned
on me in the '90s
that, wow, I should
write about this.
There's a need for a manual, a
practical manual on this topic.
"Adventures Beyond the Body"
is a result of basically
at the time my 25
years' experience.
I put down a lot
of my experiences.
Not all of them,
but some of them
I considered pivotal
experiences that
had a huge impact on myself,
like meeting my mother who had
died and my uncle who had died.
I go into specifics.
What do you do to
totally exit the body?
Some people have
their legs lift up
and they can't get a
part of their body free.
Then what do you do afterwards?
Many people have poor vision.
They can't perceive.
I go into detail about
what they should do,
how to increase
their perception.
So I went into basically
a training manual
about how to become more
and more proficient,
how to address the issues that
an out-of-body explorer will
have.
>>In the back of his book
and on William's website,
the reader can take a survey to
document their own experiences.
And for the last 10 years,
readers from around the globe
have taken part
in William's study
into the out-of-body phenomenon.
>>I received an amazing
response from my internet survey
and from my book surveys.
It was over 20,000 letters
from over 42 countries.
I have cases and
cases of letters.
It was amazing.
Matter of fact, it was more
than I could physically handle.
So what I did, I compiled
these experiences.
A few years later,
I published "Secret
of the Soul," which was a
compilation of other people's
experiences.
And I thought, wow, people
should know about this.
Being a man, I was limited
to a man's experiences,
and I wanted to get
a perception-- what's
it like for a child
to have an experience?
What's it like for a pregnant
woman to have an experience?
What's it like for a teenager?
What is it like for
different kinds of people?
Is it different for
a French person?
Is it different for an African?
I wanted to know
the answers to this.
I published a lot of it
in "Secret of the Soul."
I put the stats in there as
far as I could go, especially
on the vibrational
state about, what
do people perceive in the
vibrational state, which
is a prelude to an out-of-body
experience for most people.
In other words, how many
people have paralysis?
How many people hear noises?
How many people have
buzzing, humming sounds?
What percentage of
people hear a voice?
people are touched?
What percentage of people are,
let's just say, see or meet
with a loved one or someone
who is not in a physical body?
And what I tried
to do is document
to the best of my ability
these percentages.
Because I thought
it was important,
because a lot of people--
up to that point,
nobody had really
acknowledged the idea
of a vibrational state.
People talked about it,
but there was no evidence.
And by the vibrational
state, I mean the state
that occurs immediately
before and after
an out-of-body experience.
Because based on my
research, about 80%
of people that have an
out-of-body experience
will have some kind
of energy event
that's associated with it.
And it's an inner energy
event, even though it may not
feel it to people.
But you'll feel a buzzing
sound, for instance,
or you'll feel--
many people will
begin to feel numb
and then paralyzed,
and then a buzzing
sound will resonate
through their entire body.
It's almost like-- I write
about it as like a jet engine.
But your physical body
will become paralyzed.
That's universal.
Because you have to let
go of the physical body
to have an out-of-body
experience.
So it's actually quite logical.
>>The survey results William
collected were staggering.
Some of the most unique examples
of spontaneous out-of-body
experiences are those that
occur due to intense pain,
physical and mental
stress, illness,
and other traumatic incidents.
In the book "The
Secret of the Soul,"
William documents childhood
out-of-body experiences
ranging from four-year-olds
to teenagers.
It is important for
people to be reminded just
how natural the
out-of-body state was
when they were children,
before their belief systems
were constructed.
>>Children naturally have
out-of-body experiences
because in the younger the
child, the more prevalent
they are, because children
are not as indoctrinated.
They're not as contaminated
by the culture as adults.
It's that simple.
>>When you're young,
three, four, five,
you can have one
foot in this reality
and one foot in the other.
You're a little more in
touch with things like that.
But as you get more centered
in this physical reality,
again, that stuff
kind of goes away.
Three-year-olds
are more intuitive.
Five and six-year-olds do
out-of-body all the time.
They're more connected.
But eventually, that just,
again, fades like a dream.
It goes away, and then they're
no longer connected that way.
>>Especially up to the
age before puberty,
they're very open.
And especially between
the ages of four and six
or seven, that is where I have
received most of my letters--
I would say over a thousand just
in that age group-- of parents
that are saying that their
children not only have
an experience, they're
having multiple experiences.
Parents were taking their
children to the psychologist
because they were entering
the vibrational state.
Their children are
hearing vibrations,
they're hearing
sounds, their kids
are talking about floating
out of their body.
I mean, their kids are talking
about meeting their aunt.
Unfortunately in our
society, what do most parents
say to their children?
It was just a dream.
Wow, what an
imagination you have.
Oh, you talked to grandma.
Uh-huh.
Yeah, right.
They don't accept it as real.
Everything's a dream.
And that's not the way it is.
And nowadays, people are
beginning to awaken to that.
>>At night, a lot of kids fight
about bedtime, going to bed.
And you know, I don't
want to go to bed.
I want to stay up and do
this and so forth and so on.
I was always eager to go
to bed because for me, it
was like watching television.
And many times I would, at
night, jump out the window
and fly over to my friend's
house and play with my friends.
And that's what
everybody does at night.
I mean, that's why we sleep.
Sometimes we're
awake and we do this,
and then we go to bed
at night so that we
can go do this other stuff.
But along with
that process, I was
quite old-- eight,
nine years old--
and had a bed wetting problem.
I remember very distinctly
one night waking up in bed,
and I was mad.
I was just furious, and I
was screaming and tantruming.
And my mother came running
in and said, what's wrong?
What's wrong?
Did you hurt yourself?
Are you OK?
And I looked at her and I
said, I remember I got up
and I went into the bathroom.
I sat on the toilet.
And when I began to pee, I woke
up here, and I was all wet.
I am mad.
And she grabbed me
and she cuddled me
and she says, oh, that's OK.
That's OK.
You're fine.
She said, you know,
you have to remember
to take your body with you
when you go to the bathroom?
And I said, well,
what do you mean?
And she says, well, sometimes
you're in your body,
and sometimes you're
not in your body.
But when it's time to
go to the bathroom,
you always have to
check that you're
going to take your
body with you in there.
And I was like, ohh.
And I never wet my bed again.
>>There are no limits to
the type of experiences
a person can have once they
leave the physical world
during an OBE.
Shared experiences
in the nonphysical
have been reported
by many others.
>>My wife and I have
had experiences together
that are quite remarkable
because there's
no limits to what can happen.
For many people, this
may sound strange.
It really provides a
tremendous opportunity
for personal growth
for people because it's
also a powerful confirmation
that their experience is valid.
Because then you
come back and you're
sharing it with another person.
I think I had over 30
experiences that people have
sent to me where
they were together
on another plane of
existence, totally conscious.
>>When I was much older,
probably late '20s
when I was going
out-of-body then
purposefully-- this is after I'd
been out to Monroe laboratory--
then I would go get my
son who was at the time,
like, five, six, somewhere
in that same bracket.
And we'd go out together.
And it was like a fun thing
we would do in the evenings,
you know?
And we'd go out.
We would have adventures.
It was always a lot of fun.
And it would blow his
mom's mind in the morning
because he would
tell all about them.
The thing that
would blow her mind
was that I had already
told her about them an hour
before he woke up.
And then she'd get his story,
which would of course be
from his perspective.
So that's a good father
and son activity.
>>I have about 15
mothers who have written
to me that have actually
had communication
with their future children.
Matter of fact, a
couple of these women
are naming their children
the same name that they were
told that they are called now.
That's how clear--
in other words,
they meet the individual in
the astral plane and they say,
my name is Robert, and I'm
going to be your child.
And it sounds like, oh my god.
Come on.
But people are relating this.
>>I have had experiences
myself where my wife and I have
had shared distant experiences.
Where were you?
Well, there was a
bus load of people,
and we were feeding them.
And I said, well, did you see
when the guy in the blue truck
went by?
Said, yeah.
But he didn't want
to eat at the table
where we were serving
the food kind of a thing.
And then we go on
about our lives.
We don't think any
big deal about it.
We just know that we
were elsewhere together,
and we did something.
And we don't start a church
over it or anything else.
We just accept that as
those things happen.
>>In August of 2009,
Dennis Mennerich
attended one of Tom's
workshops in Toronto, Canada,
which allowed the
opportunity to film
and discuss in more detail one
of the first profound shared
experiences they had at
Robert Monroe's laboratory.
>>Bob had an exercise
for Dennis and I
to go out-of-body together.
And he just kind of sprung
that on us while we were there.
So we were willing
to try anything.
And we were in the
try anything mode.
And we decided we'd meet
right up above the lab,
and then we'd just go up
together and see what happens.
And we did.
And it was, I think,
about an hour and a half,
close to two hours.
I mean, there were a lot of
specific things going on.
It wasn't just that
we sat in the void
and didn't say
anything to each other.
It was a pretty
eventful experience.
And we came back.
And the lights are always
bright once you come out
of that dark, absolutely
black hole that you're in.
And we stumbled out in
the light and stumbled up
to the control room.
And there was Bob, his
usual sardonic wit.
And he kind of had this
little smirk on his face.
And he goes, do you guys
really think you were together?
That sort of thing.
And we said, eh, you
know, it seemed like it.
Yeah, I said, it
seemed like it to me.
And he said, yeah, well,
it seemed like it to him.
Because we hadn't
talked about it at all.
We still had no idea
what each other had--
So then Bob turned around in
his swivel chair and says,
well, here.
Listen to this.
And he flipped both
the tape switches on.
So Dennis' tape, which was made
just between Dennis and Bob,
and my tape, which was just
made between me and Bob-- and we
could not hear
each other, we were
in isolation booths-- started
to play at the same time.
And there was Dennis
and I, interacting.
There we were seeing
the same things,
describing the
same kind of stuff.
And it went on and on and on.
And my mouth kind of fell open.
The jaw hit the floor, and
it was like, oh my gosh.
This is real.
And that's the way I felt.
And I repeated that 50 times
over the next couple
of weeks because there
was no way to justify that.
We carry our doubt to
a pretty far extreme.
I mean, we're not going to
give in and say this is real
until we really know there's
no other-- absolutely no
other choice.
And just telling us
that it was a thousand
to one that we could do what we
had done, that wasn't enough.
But this was enough
because there
was no wiggle room in this.
There was no other way that
this could have happened other
than Dennis and I were
out-of-body together
and we saw the same things, and
we had the same conversations.
And it sounded like
what you'd expect
if you had two different tapes
of a conversation with people.
It was different.
We obviously didn't the same
words to describe everything,
but that was because we
were two different people.
We have two different
perspectives.
But it was so close
and so tied together
that it was just astounding.
And Bob was just thrilled.
His eyes were lit up.
It was like Christmas for Bob.
And my jaw dropped
to the ground.
Oh, my God for me.
And that was the big one.
And after that, there
was no doubt in my mind
that what I was doing was
exploring a different reality
frame, and that it
was every much as
real as this reality frame.
And there just wasn't
any longer any doubt.
After that, it was not
trying to figure out,
is this real, which
is really what
our mission was for the first
year or two that we were there.
We were trying to
determine, is this real?
Of course Bob knew it was
real, but that was Bob.
We didn't know it
was real until we
could prove that for ourselves.
>>I think a lot of
the things that we
did were kind of subjective.
And you go through it,
and when you're doing it,
it seems to be very valid.
But then when you get a
little space and you say,
well, you know, did that
really happen, or am
I making that up kind of things.
And so you really didn't have a
lot of concrete, objective data
to prove that the
experiences were real.
But something like this
is just-- like you said,
you just can't ignore
things like this.
>>After that, the
mission changed.
It was no longer, is this real?
It was, how does this work?
What is going on here?
What are the limits?
What are the constraints?
What are the rules?
So my whole focus
on it shifted from,
is this real to what's going on?
>>Our scientists and
explorers don't stop
at the out-of-body experience.
Instead, they begin
to research, study,
and try to understand the inner
workings of the nonphysical.
It is no longer a compilation
of many experiences,
but now it becomes
a way of life.
>>Once you get started
in something like this,
you don't just say,
oh, that was fun.
Forget about it and
do something else.
This is a way of being.
It's more than a way of life.
It's a way of being.
And being a physicist,
I'm interested in learning
how things work.
That's what I do.
I try to find out
how reality works.
So I just kept experimenting
and kept studying it
and kept researching it.
Kept going places,
kept exploring,
pushing the boundaries back,
trying to figure out why.
Why does it work this way?
Why is it sometimes this
way, and sometimes that way?
What's the difference?
What are the rules here?
What it's about
is consciousness.
So if I were to start
with an explanation,
I'd say start with
consciousness.
Well, all of us have
consciousness, right?
We're all conscious.
And that means we're aware.
What we're aware of is
our physical reality.
That's our universe.
Our planets and
our solar system.
We're not really too
much aware of that,
but we're aware of our universe,
and we're a part of it.
Well, if you think
about that awareness,
you realize that that
awareness is just data.
It's just information.
I see you, you see
me, but what's that?
It's data.
It's modulated,
electromagnetic waves
that are bouncing
off of me and you,
and we're processing
it in the brain
and interpreting those
electromagnetic pulses
as people.
So we're taking the data,
and we're interpreting
it to form our reality.
Well, everything's like that.
All the senses are like that.
Everything you hear, see, smell,
touch, is just data input.
And then you interpret
that data to be something.
Well, of course,
there's also rules.
There's rules that how the
data can relate to each other.
So my data says that
there is a wall.
My experience tells me I
cannot walk through it.
It's a solid object.
And that's one of Newton's
laws, that two things
can't occupy the same
point at the same time.
>>We know that all
of these things
are just mental projections
in our mind's eye.
It's really data bits being
processed by our brains.
The fact that we think
we agree that we're
seeing the same thing and call
this reality is a supposition.
There's no proof in physics
of a Cartesian reality.
Now can we extend
that proposition then?
If two people meet
in another dimension
and report back the
same information,
can we then assume?
Is there an implication
that this then
is real if more than one
person can relate to that?
>>Think of consciousness
as the fundamental reality.
We are consciousness.
Period.
Consciousness is digital,
so it deals with data.
Data, with rules,
creates realities.
This is our reality.
Physics is the rule set.
So are we only reality?
Is this virtual reality it?
Well, the answer to that is no.
There's lots of
virtual realities.
When you take this as
a premise, then you
can explain a lot of things
that are now unexplainable.
Using this premise
of virtual realities
explains physics
better than physics
can be explained without it.
This model of reality actually
solves a whole lot mysteries
if you think of it this way.
It solves a lot of
things that can't happen.
The paranormal things,
the UFO things,
and those other big mysteries.
Where they're
dealing with aliens,
and the aliens take them
up to their spaceship
and do experiments on them and
the rest of that, a lot of that
has to do with things
that are happening to them
in another reality system.
That doesn't mean it's
not happening to them.
It just means that
it's not happening
to them in this reality system.
So if somebody happened
to be in their room
that night with a movie camera,
they wouldn't see any of it.
This person sees it
all in experiences,
and indeed, he is
taken up to some place,
and indeed people are doing
things to him and so on.
And these other
beings are beings
that are traveling around and
are studying other beings.
So this stuff happens, but
it's not the way they think.
It's not the UFO who
travels in a saucer,
and the saucer people come
down and snatch him up out
of their beds.
That's not happening.
That's just what they
rationalize to explain it.
It's like, are all
these people liars?
Are they all psychotic?
And why do all the psychotic
people see similar things?
It's more to it than
just people who are nuts,
just like with the little kids.
It's more to it than just
kids who are hallucinating.
So you put them on
mind altering drugs
to keep them from hallucinating.
They are getting their data
from this physical matter frame,
and they're getting some from
a different physical matter
frame.
But they can't separate it, so
they're parallel processing.
I do that all the time,
but I know what I'm doing,
so it's not like I'm confused.
I know there's two frames.
If you know there's
two-- if you have two TVs
and each has a different
ball game on it,
that doesn't confuse you.
You know there's
two things going on.
If you don't know
that and you're
just listening to two
ball games at once
and you don't realize that
it's two ball games, that's
it's, what is that jumble?
You don't understand it.
Well, they don't
understand it, it so they
think it's all in this reality.
Because in their mind,
there is only one reality.
And it's this one,
and it's physical.
Therefore, when they see
something from another reality,
they think it's here.
Just like the little
children who see things
and have their playmates.
Those playmates are things that
they're doing in their mind.
They're nonphysical playmates,
but to them, they're
physical playmates.
Because when they
see them, they're
here because this
is the only reality
they've got in their mind.
They don't intellectually
say, I'm parallel processing.
That's too big a thought
for a five-year-old.
You're consciousness.
Suddenly you're plugged into
a different data stream.
You can't tell that from
here, so you say it is here.
You think it's here.
Now you see things
floating around
because they don't float
around in your reality,
so that's really weird.
You have these
real weird stories
about aliens and
spaceships and stuff.
So most of it is a very
similar kind of thing.
It's spontaneous.
These things happen
spontaneously to some people.
Bob Monroe spontaneously
had out-of-body experiences.
Some people just spontaneously
will plug into another reality
frame for a while.
Then it goes away.
>>As you begin to
explore in altered states
of consciousness, you
will find the universe
has countless dimensions and
realities to be explored.
This universe is
multi-dimensional,
and the places of exploration
are almost limitless.
>>Well, let's go back for a
minute to Bob Monroe's stories
and this first experimentation
of being in bed,
feeling this sort of vibration
of puffing up and collapsing,
puffing and collapsing,
puffing and collapsing, that he
got over the fear of that.
And then when he could
feel himself sort of loose,
as it were, then he would
push that other hand
that he perhaps thought he
had down through the floor.
And he could feel the insulation
and the nails, and so forth.
And he'd pull his hand back up.
And then they
began to experiment
in his house, and
then his neighborhood,
and then there were a few
earthly places he went to.
And then there were beings that
he met and said, come with me,
and I'll show you
something else.
He called that in
this first book
"locale two," meaning
that locale one
was this earth stuff.
And he became fascinated
in this other realm
called locale two, which
was just there's here,
and then there's
the other place.
This is locale one,
that's locale two.
In his later books, he found
there are many other places,
other worlds, other dimensions.
And this is really
boring and primitive.
>>This is just one.
There's hundreds of virtual
realities out there.
This consciousness system
didn't just put all its eggs
in this one basket.
There's other virtual realities,
and they're all different.
They have different rules.
They're not all
the same rule sets.
So it is a big,
complex world out there
in the world of consciousness.
>>I found it amazing that when
I was leaving my body, just how
many different
realities existed,
and how many dimensions, and
many of the old models that
were presented.
For instance, a
seven within seven.
I have found they
are not accurate.
For instance, the
astral plane is
filled with thousands,
countless realities
and vibrational levels.
It was immense.
It's absolutely immense
beyond my expectations.
It would take lifetimes
just to explore that.
>>We're not the center of
this physical universe.
We're not the center of
the conscious universe.
We're just individual conscious
entities trying to grow up.
This physical matter
reality has spawned billions
of different of life forms.
We probably have a billion just
different kinds of insects.
There's lots of life forms here.
Well, the other
reality frames haven't
been sleeping all this time.
They've also spawned
billions of life forms.
And the life forms
fit the rule set that
defines the virtual reality.
So there's things
that exist there
that don't exist here because we
have a narrower rule set here.
There's a lot of
things out there
that have never even heard
of this reality frame.
The humans on Earth are
like a fly speck somewhere.
There they don't know it exists.
They have their own systems
that they work with.
So it's not like we're the
center of this consciousness
universe.
>>Once your consciousness
leaves this physical world
and enters the nonphysical, your
mental focus and state of mind
drives your experience
into these other realities.
In other words, consciousness
is moved by intent.
>>The where you go to,
apparently from our ability
to understand based on our
own experience and our command
of the language,
the where you go to
seems to depend
upon your intent.
>>Consciousness is moved by
intent, conscious intent.
You might call it will.
It's what you intend to happen.
So I can send you a
message by intending
to send you a message.
Well, it really happens
anyway when we talk.
Before the word comes
out of my mouth,
I have an intention of
what it is I want to say.
I take that intention
of the communication,
I put it into thoughts, the
thoughts go into symbols,
the symbols come out
as acoustic vibrations,
and then you get it
and do the opposite.
You take the acoustics
vibrations, turn them
into symbols, the
symbols mean things,
turns back into thought.
So we're going through
this little process here.
>>So the way in which you can
declare or purify or objectify
your intent seems to be the
navigational beacon or tool
that takes you to wherever
this other place is, other
than this local world, or
what Bob called locale one.
>>A normal OBE can be
turned into a highly
spiritual experience
by you focusing
your mind into your intention.
Because our intention rules.
Our intention rules
our experiences.
This opens up a door to
all kinds of, I feel,
profound and advanced
spiritual development,
far beyond anything
that's taught today.
>>Now you have to
focus that intent,
and you have to focus it
without a lot of noise.
That's why usually
meditation is first
because that's how you
get rid of the noise
and get that clear, still
spot where you're just
point consciousness,
no chatter going on.
Then you're focused.
If you can maintain
that focus and have
a clear intent of what
you want to accomplish,
then you can accomplish it.
>>All of our
form-based realities,
physical and nonphysical,
they're all created by thought.
Everything is a
thought form in a way,
if you could look
at it that way.
An energetic thought form.
And yes, there's many
negative thought forms
because humanity,
six billion of us,
are creating negative thoughts.
So yes, when you
leave your body,
of course there's going to be
negative things encountered.
I'll be the last person to
say that that's not a fact.
The point is though, we are far
more powerful as the creators.
We create our own reality.
We create it when
we leave our body,
we create our own reality
in the physical world.
There's basically
like attracts like.
There's an energetic
connection to all things.
And if you are not
harboring negative thoughts,
you're not going to be
attracted to negative thoughts.
This is one of the basic things
I found about leaving my body.
>>So if you get a
whole lot of people
on the planet thinking
disaster, disaster, earthquakes,
terrible things, it's
all going to end, that
helps bring about that reality.
The natural way that the
consciousness system works
is that it produces your fears.
What you are afraid of, it
will materialize for you.
If you're really afraid
that nobody will like you,
then you act in a way that
makes nobody like you.
Because you're afraid
that nobody will like you,
you will be withdrawn, or
you will be aggressive,
or you will be some other way
that makes people not like you.
You make your fears come true.
Well, that's not
just psychology.
That's the way
consciousness works.
The whole conscious system,
it's fundamental nature.
You will make your
fears come true.
You create your own reality.
>>So most of the
fear-based beliefs
that dominate our society
today, unfortunately,
they're totally unnecessary.
Fear of evil influence,
fear-- there's
so many fears out there that
are hindering people's progress.
They're totally unnecessary.
And they're quite
archaic, actually.
Especially these ideas of
devils and Satan and blah.
And it goes on and on and on.
All of these things
are man-made creations.
>>You know, there'd be
some religious people
that if you said, oh
yes, I go out-of-body,
they'd say, oh, work of the
devil, or something like that.
I mean, there are people
who are like that.
They are very narrow in
their reality system.
They have very,
very narrow ideas.
And they're trapped in that box.
If they get in a mindset
with beliefs and things
that narrow them
into a small box,
it's very difficult
for them to evolve,
to be what it is they naturally
are, which is consciousness.
>>Many of these biblical
tales of devils and demons
may have been misinterpreted
all throughout history.
Think of it.
Imagine if they were
all misinterpreted,
and all these stories of
devils and demons, maybe
they were all just
confrontations with someone's
fear that was misinterpreted.
Maybe.
Why not?
In other words, anybody,
any confrontation
with an evil entity is
actually a positive.
It's an opportunity
for us to grow.
And I know many
people can't accept.
They feel this is
a strange concept.
But I know this to be a fact.
It's a powerful fact.
One of the advantages
of self-initiated OBEs
is that it allows
you the opportunity
to confront and
resolve your own fear.
>>If you have fear--
if, let's say, you
have fear that
you can't get back
when you're in that
reality, there's a big wall.
Well, that's your fear.
It's not that somebody just
constructed a wall there
to be mean to you.
You're running into your fear.
If you run into beings
that are not nice to you
and struggle with
you, that's your fear
that you're dealing with.
Those are your own
demons, so to speak.
If you have belief
systems, you'll
run into things that work
with those belief systems.
So if you're very religious,
you may see angels and people
walking around in robes
and things like that.
If you're not, you
may see other things.
>>I'd like to tell a
story real briefly.
I think it will clarify
this whole thing
because there's a lot of fear
about negative influences.
I know that.
A lot of people still
feel that people
need to be exorcised
of evil spirits and all
these other aspects.
This I think will clarify it.
I once had an out-of-body
experience where
I had a normal separation.
I left my body.
And I walked through-- often
I will walk-- a focus door now
is my focus.
I go through the door.
I'm out into my
hallway of my home.
It's still physical-like.
And I realize that
suddenly there are
steps going up and going down.
There's steps going up to a
very bright, golden light,
and there's steps going down
to a very dark, dank place.
And I'm standing at this landing
between these two realities.
And I'm standing
there in awe really
of-- oh my god, look at this.
This beautiful
staircase going up
and this dark
staircase going down.
And I'm standing
here just staring.
And as I do, I
realize that there's
a dark energy, dark figure
at the bottom of the steps.
And this dark creature is
starting to move up the steps.
And I didn't know what it was.
I just stood there
almost frozen with fear
as this creature starts to
come up the steps towards me.
And as it emerges from the
darkness of the basement
or whatever, I realize
that it's a giant sloth
about nine foot tall
with the face of a dog
and huge claws that were
like four inches long.
And it's moving up
the steps slowly,
and it looks like it's just
going to tear me to shreds.
And I'm standing there.
And I'm not always brave.
If I wanted to
avoid this scenario,
I could just think of my
body, and I'm instantly back
in my body to avoid it.
But I'm stood there
frozen basically with fear
as this creature starts
to come up to me.
And it literally wraps its
huge, hairy arms around me
and grasps me, and then
this giant dog face
comes down and licks my face.
And then the entire
creature dissolved away.
And at that moment, I
felt this huge burst
of energy flowing through me.
And then I realized, oh my god.
I just felt wave after wave
of energy flowing through me.
The creature's gone,
dissolved away.
And I realized
instantaneously that what
the heck was this monster?
It was a manifestation
of my own fear.
I just confronted a
manifestation, a collection,
you could say, of my own fear.
And in doing so,
by standing there,
by being firm, whatever
you want to call it,
even though I was fearful,
I confronted my own fear.
There's is a powerful
lesson in this.
I've had many different
scenarios of this
occur my life in my OBEs.
They're not independent
life forms as such.
Unfortunately, people
limit themselves
by their acceptance of
these negative beliefs.
And they don't even
realize they've done it.
>>Whatever you believe
creates a limitation.
I would venture to say that
all beliefs are basically
limitations.
And then you learn to work
with those limitations
or work around those
limitations with some other way.
People go through
all these rituals.
First thing they do is they give
affirmations and incantations,
and I'm going in to
visit the nonphysical,
but I only want to meet
people that are good.
And I don't want to
meet any monsters,
and please don't hurt me.
And they go through
all of this stuff
that they've got to say
first before they can go.
Well, they have to go through
that because they're fearful.
And that is a tool that they
use to feel like now they're
separate from it.
Now they're invulnerable.
Now they have their shield.
OK, with my handy shield
I'll be all right,
and I won't have
to worry about it.
So now they can go
forth because they've
got their handy shield on it.
Many of us have
tools that we create
that help us do these things.
And all the tool is is a device
to help us focus our intent.
The shield is
unnecessary, but it
lets them intend to
be unassessable, let's
them intend to be invulnerable.
Now they have the intent
that they're invulnerable,
and they won't get hurt.
Well, now they're
invulnerable, so hey, it works.
With practice, you can
produce tools that suit you,
or you can eventually learn
to let go of tools so you
don't use tools.
But that's harder because
we don't think that way.
Our minds just
don't work that way.
So if you just go out and
try to do it without tools,
you'd probably find it doesn't
work very well for you.
Because it works
for your intellect.
So belief basically
gets in the way.
It's because of our beliefs
that we need all these tools.
If we didn't have
these beliefs, we
wouldn't need all these tools.
So the tool sets are ways to
get around our beliefs, really.
To circumvent the beliefs
that are limitations.
Now the meditation
tool is a tool
that helps you get
to that clear space
where you've quieted
all the thoughts.
One way people meditate
is to bring up an image.
And they look at that image.
And the reason that works
is that the image because it
busies their mind with this
image, they start forgetting.
All the other thoughts
start to go away
because they get consumed
with this one image.
And then once they're
in this alone space,
there's nothing but them and the
image, they let the image go.
And guess what?
They're in meditation state.
That's another way to meditate.
Bring up a picture
of a soccer ball, OK?
Then let the soccer
ball rotate, and you
can see the little black
things going around the side
as it rotates.
And rotate it faster,
and rotate it slower,
and then slow it down.
And pretty soon, in
order to do that,
you're so focused
on that soccer ball
that everything else is gone.
And then let the soccer ball
go, and now you're alone.
If you can maintain that state.
If you believe that
now you're just
back here without your soccer
ball, than state goes away.
And you were in
that altered state,
but now you jump right
back to this state.
So again, that belief
gets in your way.
So see, it's really very simple.
>>Having an out
of body experience
is not a difficult state
of consciousness to obtain.
We make it difficult
with our fears, beliefs,
and by making our tools
complex and sacred,
preventing us from
reaching our destination.
>>How do you get there?
Well, you just shift
your consciousness.
Well, that sounds like,
oh, that's too easy.
I can't just shift
my consciousness.
I can't do that.
Well, that's because you
have all these beliefs.
You have these limitations.
You have these other
things that get in the way.
You could.
It's not a matter of
learning something new.
It's a matter of letting
go of something old.
It always requires
us doing something.
It doesn't have
to do with doing.
It has to do with being.
It has to do with you
being consciousness.
You can just connect to
another reality frame
just because you want to,
because you're intent,
because you connect
to that frame.
You don't have to go lie
down, get into this state,
get in oscillation
state, get out of body.
You don't have-- all that
process is just process
to make us feel better because
we feel like we have to do
something to get somewhere.
If we really understood
ourselves as consciousness,
you can go there just because
you intend to go there.
And you can do it immediately.
And you don't have to first
get real fuzzy in the mind
and do something weird.
You don't have to use tools.
You don't have to
really do any of that.
I've had a number of people say,
Tom, I want to go out of body.
I want to experience these
other reality frames.
But I get up there and I
meditate and I get that,
and nothing happens.
Well, I tell them,
well, if you get there
and you're in that
point of consciousness,
it's not that nothing happens.
It already has happened.
You're there.
Intend something.
Go somewhere.
Do something.
Have an experience.
Well, they're
blocking all that out.
They have this idea of what
it's supposed to be like.
And unless that happens,
then nothing's happened yet.
So basically, they're there
in idle, sitting there
with their mind closed.
Nothing happens.
So they are the problem
why nothing's happening.
It's not that somebody has to
go pull them out of their body,
they need another technique.
You know, what's the magic word?
How do you do this?
Do you have to do it with
your head facing north?
You go through all
of these things,
and that's not
really what you need.
It's like, go to that still,
quiet space, have an intent.
But please, have an
intent that you can then
check to see whether it's
actually having an effect,
whether it's real.
That you're not just making it
up, that you're imagining it.
That's how you can
tell the difference.
Otherwise, you can't
That's probably another
good point to talk about.
How do you tell the difference?
You have to do
evidential things.
So it may be
statistical evidence.
You may have to do it
over and over again,
but you can collect evidence.
Go someplace that
you've never been,
look around, see what it looks
like, and then go look it up.
Go get Google Maps
and look at it
and see if that's
what it looks like.
Go visit some individuals.
Call them up and say,
what were you doing?
Were you just sitting in the
kitchen having a conversation?
You have to do these kinds of
things to collect evidence,
because otherwise
you never know.
Said, OK, I had this adventure,
but I just made it all up.
It's just in my mind.
Well, of course
it's in your mind.
That's the point.
It's supposed to
be in your mind.
But to know whether or not
your intent is traveling,
your intent is
getting that data,
that real data, or whether
it's just your intellect
making up data to
satisfy a need,
those are two different things.
And the only way that you
can tell the difference
is by doing things
that are evidential.
That will then convince you.
Once you've done enough
things that, gee, I
couldn't have known that
any other way other than I
got that information,
then you know,
well, here's the state I was in.
Then you try to duplicate that.
If your evidence
comes back and says,
nope, we weren't
even home, then you
try to say, well, let's
not do it that way again.
It's trial and error.
You have to practice
at these altered states
with your intent, with
focusing it, how you focus it.
Adjust your tools, practice.
You get better at it.
Takes a long time.
I've been doing
this for 35 years,
so that gives me an advantage
over somebody that's just
been doing it for 25 years.
You get better at it with
practice, like anything else.
>>So it's like a skill,
and it becomes something
that you practice.
And the more you practice,
the more you're able to do it.
For instance, we have one
exercise in our Gateway Voyage
where people go out
and they actually
practice moving,
changing their awareness
as they're out in the
natural environment
so that we can help
people to realize
that all of these ranges of
experience are available to us
at any time.
But what I think begins
to happen, for me anyway,
is that there's a more
subtle form of communication
that happens, that you
begin to pay attention more.
And I think it's really
more a matter of attention
than it is anything else.
You get little insights,
maybe little intuitions,
answers to questions that
seem to come out of nowhere.
Or maybe somebody
will say something,
and you realize that that's
not just that person talking.
There's a larger
piece of information
that's coming through.
And when you begin to move
through life like that,
then you also understand
that our world
is speaking to us all the
time, if we will pay attention.
And therein lies the
difficulty, is paying attention.
It's a lot of fun to be able
to move into other dimensions.
It's wonderful.
But I think the real
challenge is, how do we
begin to integrate
that so that we
are on a frequency,
a wavelength where
we are truly present
but also truly
aware of other information
that may be coming to us?
There's something very
wonderful about this reality.
We are here for a purpose.
And so I think
it's very important
that as we look at
out-of-body issues
that we also look very
carefully at in-body issues
so that we really value
what's going on in this world.
>>In the totality
of all the universe
and all the dimensions
of which we occupy,
this is very brief, very
momentary, very minuscule,
and yet not unimportant
in the grand totality
of everything, which is the true
nature of who we really are.
In a metaphor, my
little finger is
pretty small in the totality
of who I am in total,
but I'd hate to lose it.
>>A lot of people are
looking for real answers.
They're tired of more beliefs.
They're tired of being told to
believe this and to read this.
And they want to know based
on their own experiences.
And that's what this does.
It opens up that potential
to actually see yourself
beyond your physical
body, to prove to yourself
your own immortality, which
is incredibly powerful, just
that in itself.
It's mind boggling.
That often just awakens people
spiritually because then
they begin to really focus
on their quest or their path
inward beyond the
physical world.
>>Maybe your beliefs
have been shifted
or your initial fears
have been dissolved away.
The tools have been offered
to focus your intention
and to satisfy your curiosity.
Now is the time where we
can find our own answers
and explore what is
beyond the physical.
[MUSIC PLAYING]